ādau hairaṇyagarbhīṃ tanumavikalajīvātmikāmāsthitastvaṃ
jīvatvaṃ prāpya māyāguṇagaṇakhacito vartase viśvayone |
tatrodvṛddhena sattvena tu guṇayugalaṃ bhaktibhāvaṃ gatena
chitvā sattvaṃ ca hitvā punaranupahito vartitāhe tvameva ||1||
ādau hairaṇyagarbhīṃ tanum-	in the beginning as Hiranyagarbha form
avikala-jīvātmikām-	undivided (collective) state of all jivas
āsthita:-tvaṃ	manifested Thou
jīvatvaṃ prāpya	becoming (separate) jivas
māyā-guṇa-gaṇa-khacita:	with Maayaa and its various Gunas associated
vartase viśvayone	(Thou do) manifest, O Thou Origin of All!
tatra-udvṛddhena sattvena	there, by well developed Sattva Guna
tu guṇa-yugalaṃ	indeed the other two (Rajas and Tamas)
bhakti-bhāvaṃ gatena	when devotion attitude is got
chitvā sattvaṃ ca hitvā	destroying (the other two) and Sattva also leaving behind
puna:-anupahita:	again unobstructed
vartitāhe tvam-eva	shall remain Thyself only
O Thou! The Origin of All! In the beginning Thou were in an undivided state of all jivas in the Hiranyagarbha form. Then Thou do manifest Thyself in multiplicity of jivas, and become associated with Maayaa and its various Gunas. With the well developed and dominant Sattva, devotional attitude is reached, by which the other two gunas Rajas and Tamas are destroyed. By and by when Sattva also is abandoned I (the jiva) shall, again, unobstructed, realise myself as Thyself only.
sattvonmeṣāt kadācit khalu viṣayarase doṣabodhe'pi bhūman
bhūyo'pyeṣu pravṛttissatamasi rajasi proddhate durnivārā |
cittaṃ tāvadguṇāśca grathitamiha mithastāni sarvāṇi roddhuṃ
turye tvayyekabhaktiśśaraṇamiti bhavān haṃsarūpī nyagādīt ||2||
sattva-unmeṣāt	when Sattva upsurges (predominates)
kadācit khalu	sometimes indeed
viṣaya-rase	in sense enjoyments
doṣa-bodhe-api	harmfulness is realised even
bhūman	O Infinite Being!
bhūya:-api-eṣu	again also in these (beings)
pravṛtti:-satamasi rajasi	preponderous in Tamas and Rajas
proddhate durnivārā	attraction is difficult to overcome
cittaṃ tāvat-guṇā:-ca	then the mind and the gunas
grathitam-iha mitha:-	interlocked here mutually
tāni sarvāṇi roddhuṃ	all these to control
turye tvayi-eka-bhakti:-	in the Turiya Thee alone devotion
śaraṇam-iti	is the refuge, thus
bhavān haṃsa-rūpī nyagādīt	Thou, in the form of a swan instructed
O Infinite Being! When the Sattva Guna predominates, the harmfulness of sense enjoyments is realised. Whereas when the Rajas and Tamas are predominant, to abstain from worldly enjoyments becomes difficult, because the mind and the gunas are mutually interlinked. To control all these, devotion in Thy Tureeya state alone is the only refuge. Thus, in the form of a swan Thou instructed.
santi śreyāṃsi bhūyāṃsyapi rucibhidayā karmiṇāṃ nirmitāni
kṣudrānandāśca sāntā bahuvidhagataya: kṛṣṇa tebhyo bhaveyu: |
tvaṃ cācakhyātha sakhye nanu mahitatamāṃ śreyasāṃ bhaktimekāṃ
tvadbhaktyānandatulya: khalu viṣayajuṣāṃ sammada: kena vā syāt ||3||
santi śreyāṃsi bhūyāṃsi-api	there are for welfare many (paths) also
ruci-bhidayā karmiṇāṃ	suited to taste of people
nirmitāni kṣudra-ānandā:-	and are created trivial joy giving
ca sāntā bahu-vidha-gataya:	and are ephemerals and many kinds of results
kṛṣṇa tebhya: bhaveyu:	O Krishna! From them can be had
tvaṃ ca-ācakhyathā sakhye	and Thou did say to Thy friend
nanu mahitatamāṃ	indeed super glorious
śreyasāṃ bhaktim-ekāṃ	and welfare bringing devotion alone
tvat-bhakti-ānanda-tulya:	Thy devotion's bliss in comparison
khalu viṣaya-juṣāṃ sammada:	for people engrossed in worldly pleasures
kena vā syat	by what can there be
There are many paths of welfare laid down to suit varying tastes of people as means of fulfilment. O Krishna! They lead to goals that yield only temporary and trivial pleasures. Thou did describe to Thy friend, Uddhava, devotion as the most glorious path for attainment of supreme spiritual welfare of man. Where does the joy that people get by worldly pursuits, stand in comparison to the bliss of devotion to Thee!
tvatbhaktyā tuṣṭabuddhe: sukhamiha carato vicyutāśasya cāśā:
sarvā: syu: saukhyamayya: salilakuharagasyeva toyaikamayya: |
so'yaṃ khalvindralokaṃ kamalajabhavanaṃ yogasiddhīśca hṛdyā:
nākāṅkṣatyetadāstāṃ svayamanupatite mokṣasaukhye'pyanīha: ||4||
tvat-bhaktyā tuṣṭa-buddhe:	in Thy devotion (whose) satisfied is the mind
sukham-iha carata:	happily in this world moving about
vicyuta-āśasya	whose all desires have dropped
ca-āśā: sarvā: syu:	and for whom all directions become
saukhyamayya:	full of joy
salila-kuharagasya-eva	in the waters' depths going (creatures) (living)
toya-ekamayya:	water is everywhere
sa:-ayaṃ khalu-	that this (person) indeed,
indralokaṃ kamalaja-bhavanaṃ	Indraloka or Brahamaa's residence
yoga-siddhī:-ca hṛdyā:	or Yogic powers attractive
na-ākāṅkṣati-	does not covet for
etat-āstāṃ	may this be so
svayam-anupatite	by itself coming (to him)
mokṣa-saukhye-api-anīha:	the liberation bliss also is not desired for
A person whose mind is satisfied in Thy devotion, moves about happily in this world. One who has dropped all desires, for him, every place is full of joy, just like an aquatic creature living in deep waters, finds water everywhere. Such a person does not covet Indraloka or Brahmaa's residence or the attractive Yogic powers. This may be so. The bliss of liberation coming of its own to him is also without his seeking.
tvadbhakto bādhyamāno'pi ca viṣayarasairindriyāśāntiheto-
rbhaktyaivākramyamāṇai: punarapi khalu tairdurbalairnābhijayya: |
saptārcirdīpitārcirdahati kila yathā bhūridāruprapañcaṃ
tvadbhaktyoghe tathaiva pradahati duritaṃ durmada: kvendriyāṇām ||5||
tvat-bhakta:	and Thy devotee
bādhyamāna:-api ca	ensnared, though
viṣaya-rasai:-indriya-	by sense pleasures, (because of) the senses
aśānti-heto:-	not in control because of
bhaktyā-eva-ākramyamāṇai:	by devotion alone (when) they are confronted
puna:-api khalu	again also indeed
tai:-durbalai:-na-abhijayya:	by them, the weak senses are not conquered
saptārci:-dīpitārci:-dahati	the fire well lit burns down
kila yathā bhūri-dāru-prapañcam	indeed, just as, a great heap of wood
tvat-bhakti-oghe tathā-eva	in Thy devotion's stream in the same manner
pradahati duritaṃ	burns up sins (and sinful tendencies)
durmada: kva-indriyāṇām	the false power, of senses, where (does it stand)
If Thy devotee is sometimes ensnared by sense pleasure, because of his senses not being in his control fully, they by nature weak, cannot stand the onslaught of devotion and so Thy devotee cannot be conquered by the senses. Just as a well lit blazing fire burns down stacks and heaps of wood, in the same way Thy devotion burns away stacks of sins and sinful tendencies. When this happens, the false power of the senses do not stand any chance.
cittārdrībhāvamuccairvapuṣi ca pulakaṃ harṣavāṣpaṃ ca hitvā
cittaṃ śuddhyetkathaṃ vā kimu bahutapasā vidyayā vītabhakte: |
tvadgāthāsvādasiddhāñjanasatatamarīmṛjyamāno'yamātmā
cakṣurvattattvasūkṣmaṃ bhajati na tu tathā'bhyastayā tarkakoṭyā||6||
citta-ārdrī-bhāvam-	the mind's melting in love
uccai:-vapuṣi ca pulakaṃ	standing on end on the body, the hair
harṣa-vāṣpaṃ ca hitvā	and joyous tears flooding, without these
cittaṃ śuddhyet-kathaṃ vā	the mind becomes pure, in what manner
kimu bahu-tapasā	what is the use of many austerities
vidyayā vīta-bhakte:	or of learning, devoid of devotion
tvat-gāthā-āsvāda-	Thy narrations imbibing
siddha-añjana-satata-	is sure collyrium for constant
marīmṛjyamāna:-ayam-ātmā	purification of this soul
cakṣu:-vat-tattva-sūkṣmaṃ	like the eyes (which reveal the objects), the subtle truth
bhajati na tu tathā-	is revealed, not so indeed
abhyastayā tarkakoṭyā	by the study of highly sophisticated arguments
Unless the heart melts with love, the hair of the whole body stand on end or tears of joy flow, how can the mind be purified. Of what use are austerities or learning devoid of devotion. Just as, by constant use of collyrium  the eyes can see the objects, the mind intuits Thy subtle truth by constant imbibing of Thy narrations and so purifying the soul. It is not so indeed by the study of highly sophisticated arguments.
dhyānaṃ te śīlayeyaṃ samatanusukhabaddhāsano nāsikāgra-
nyastākṣa: pūrakādyairjitapavanapathaścittapadmaṃ tvavāñcam|
ūrdhvāgraṃ bhāvayitvā ravividhuśikhina: saṃvicintyopariṣṭāt
tatrasthaṃ bhāvaye tvāṃ sajalajaladharaśyāmalaṃ komalāṅgam ||7||
dhyānaṃ te śīlayeyaṃ	meditation on Thee (I) will practice
sama-tanu-sukha-baddha-āsana:	with body erect and sitting in sukhaasana
nāsikā-agra-nyasta-ākṣa:	on the nose tip gazing eyes
pūraka-ādyai:-jita-pavana-patha:-	with Pooraka etc., controlling the vital breath energies
citta-padmaṃ tu-avāñcam	the heart lotus indeed facing downwards
ūrdhva-agraṃ bhāvayitvā	fully blown and upward imagining
ravi-vidhu-śikhina:	in sun moon and fire
saṃvicintya-upariṣṭāt	imagining above it
tatrasthaṃ bhāvaye tvāṃ	there placed will meditate on Thee
sajala-jaladhara-śyāmalaṃ	like water bearing cloud dark blue
komalāṅgam	Thy delicate form
To practice meditation, I will sit erect in a comfortable pose (sukhaasana) and gaze on the tip of the nose. Controlling my vital breath energies by doing Pooraka etc., praanaayaam (breath control) I will imagine the downward lotus in the heart as facing upward. I will imagine the sun, moon and fire above it and Thee in a delicate dark blue form as the water bearing clouds, seated on the top.
ānīlaślakṣṇakeśaṃ jvalitamakarasatkuṇḍalaṃ mandahāsa-
syandārdraṃ kaustubhaśrīparigatavanamāloruhārābhirāmam |
śrīvatsāṅkaṃ subāhuṃ mṛdulasadudaraṃ kāñcanacchāyacelaṃ
cārusnigdhorumambhoruhalalitapadaṃ bhāvaye'haṃ bhavantam ||8||
ānīla-ślakṣṇa-keśaṃ	blue and lustrous hair
jvalita-makara-satkuṇḍalaṃ	shining fish shaped beautiful earrings
manda-hāsa-syanda-ārdraṃ	gentle smile with compassion flowing
kaustubha-śrī-parigata-	the lustrous beauty of Kaustubha covering
vanamāla-uru-hāra-abhirāmam	the garlands and big necklaces attractive
śrīvatsa-aṅkaṃ subāhuṃ	the Shreevatsa mark, beautiful arms
mṛdu-lasat-udaraṃ	soft and charming abdomen
kāñcana-cchāya-celaṃ	golden hued garment
cāru-snigdha-urum-	comely well shaped thighs
ambhoruha-lalita padaṃ	like the lotus tender feet
bhāvaye-ahaṃ bhavantaṃ	I shall meditate on Thee
I meditate on Thy blue form which has lustrous hair, shining fish shaped earrings, a gentle smile with compassion flowing, lustre of Kaustubha spreading over the garlands and the big pearl necklaces, the Shreevatsa mark, a soft and charming abdomen, golden hued garment, comely well shaped thighs and lotus like tender feet.
sarvāṅgeṣvaṅga raṅgatkutukamiti muhurdhārayannīśa cittaṃ
tatrāpyekatra yuñje vadanasarasije sundare mandahāse
tatrālīnaṃ tu ceta: paramasukhacidadvaitarūpe vitanva-
nnanyanno cintayeyaṃ muhuriti samupārūḍhayogo bhaveyam ||9||
sarva-aṅgeṣu-aṅga	on all Thy limbs, O Beloved!
raṅgat-kutukam-iti	with growing eagerness, thus
muhu:-dhārayan-īśa cittaṃ	again and again concentrating, O Lord! My mind
tatra-api-ekatra yuñje	there also on one place will fix (the mind)
vadana-sarasije	on Thy face lotus like
sundare mandahāse	beautiful with a gentle smile
tatra-ālīnaṃ tu ceta:	there absorbed indeed, the mind
parama-sukha-cit-	Eternal Bliss Consciousness
advaita-rūpe vitanvan-	non-dual form immersing
anyat-no cintayeyaṃ	anything else will not think
muhu:-iti	again and again thus
samupārūḍha-yogo bhaveyam	I shall remain steady in the advanced state of communion
O Beloved Lord! Again and again I will concentrate with growing eagerness on all Thy limbs. Then I will fix my mind on Thy lotus like face with a gentle smile. The fully absorbed mind in the Eternal Bliss Consciousness in a non-dual form will not think of anything else. Thus I shall remain steady in the advanced state of communion, by repeated effort.
itthaṃ tvaddhyānayoge sati punaraṇimādyaṣṭasaṃsiddhayastā:
dūraśrutyādayo'pi hyahamahamikayā sampateyurmurāre |
tvatsamprāptau vilambāvahamakhilamidaṃ nādriye kāmaye'haṃ
tvāmevānandapūrṇaṃ pavanapurapate pāhi māṃ sarvatāpāt ||10||
itthaṃ tvat	in this manner, in Thy
dhyāna-yoge sati puna:-	meditation having mastered, again
aṇimā-ādi-	Animaa etc.,
aṣṭa-saṃsiddhaya:-tā:	the eight bodied Sidhdhis, they
dūra-śruti-ādaya:-api	from far, hearing etc., also
hi-aham-ahamikayā	indeed, competing with one another
sampateyu:-murāre	will come, O Slayer of Mura!
tvat-samprāptau	to Thee having reached
vilamba-āvaham-	delay causing
akhilam-idaṃ na-ādriye	all this is, will not accept
kāmaye-ahaṃ tvām-eva-	I long for Thee alone
ānandapūrṇaṃ pavanapurapate	the Plentitude of Bliss! O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi māṃ sarva-tāpāt	save me from all miseries
O Slayer of Mura! As I master meditation on Thee, the eight bodied Sidhdhis - Animaa etc., will indeed come to me jostling one another. Realising that they only cause delay in one's attainment of Thee, I shall not accept them. I long for Thee alone, the Plentitude of Bliss. O Lord of Guruvaayur! save me from all miseries.